Section I
20 marks
Attempt Questions 1–20
Allow about 30 minutes for this section
Use the multiple-choice answer sheet for Questions 1–20.
1 What is the use of surveillance cameras in public places an example of?
(A) Retribution
(B) Restorative justice
(C) Social crime prevention
(D) Situational crime prevention
2 Who decides a question of law in a criminal case in the NSW Supreme Court?
(A) The jury
(B) The judge
(C) The defence
(D) The prosecutor
3 A national government bans all forms of public protest by an environmental group.
What is being denied by the government?
(A) Civil and political rights
(B) The right to self-determination
(C) Environmental and peace rights
(D) Economic, social and cultural rights
4 What is the aim of a diversionary program?
(A) Imprisonment
(B) Incapacitation
(C) Rehabilitation
(D) Retribution
Use the following information to answer Questions 5–8.
18-year-old Alex and 19-year-old Dale planned to rob a bank. The next day Alex drove the car and waited for Dale to rob the bank. Dale robbed the bank and they both drove away. 12-year-old Shane was waiting at their house to assist them.
5 What best describes the role played by Shane?
(A) Accessory after the fact
(B) Accessory before the fact
(C) Principal in the first degree
(D) Principal in the second degree
6 What category of crime has Alex committed?
(A) Driving
(B) Property
(C) Public order
(D) White collar
7 Which of the following best describes what Dale committed?
(A) Both attempted robbery and robbery
(B) Both conspiracy to rob and robbery
(C) Conspiracy to rob
(D) Robbery
8 What is the most likely manner in which Alex's and Shane's cases will be dealt with in
the criminal justice system?
(A) They will be heard together.
(B) They will be heard in open court.
(C) They will be heard in different courts.
(D) They will be heard by a judge and jury.
9 Which of the following human rights is expressly recognised in the Australian
Constitution?
(A) Freedom of religion
(B) Freedom of assembly
(C) The right to marry
(D) The right to education
10 What is the first step in a criminal trial process for murder?
(A) A jury is empanelled.
(B) An arrest warrant is issued.
(C) A committal hearing is held.
(D) The offender is charged by police.
11 Which of the following is NOT a feature of human rights?
(A) They are inherent.
(B) They are universal.
(C) They are enforceable.
(D) They are inalienable.
12 A police officer issues a caution instead of an on-the-spot fine to a person whose car is
illegally parked.
What is the police officer's action an example of?
(A) Discretion
(B) Corruption
(C) A breach of criminal law
(D) A breach of the rule of law
13 Which of the following may be an aggravating factor when sentencing in a criminal trial?
(A) The offender not being aware of the consequences of their actions
(B) The offender not planning the crime
(C) The age of the offender
(D) The age of the victim
14 Which of the following is a feature of victim impact statements in NSW?
(A) They are required by the court.
(B) They are presented at sentencing.
(C) They are used in determining guilt.
(D) They are part of the prosecution case.
15 The Australian Government has ratified an international human rights treaty.
What is the practical effect of this?
(A) It grants human rights to Australian citizens.
(B) It makes breaches of human rights punishable in Australia.
(C) It enables the Australian Government to enact human rights legislation.
(D) It makes breaches of human rights punishable by international tribunals.
16 Which of the following is best characterised as transnational crime?
(A) Murder
(B) Torture
(C) Sexual assault
(D) People smuggling
17 Police allege a driver was speeding in a school zone.
What do the police have to prove if the matter goes to court?
(A) The driver was speeding.
(B) The driver intended to speed.
(C) The driver knew it was a school zone.
(D) The driver knew the school zone speed limit.
18 An Australian citizen has been charged under laws enacted by the Crimes (Child Sex
Tourism) Amendment Act 1994 (Cth). The alleged events occurred when he was on
holidays in Indonesia.
This is an example of the operation of which type of law?
(A) International law
(B) Transnational law
(C) Australian domestic law
(D) Indonesian domestic law
19 Lou is suspected by the police of having stolen a car.
Which of the following is a legal power that the police have when they approach Lou?
(A) To arrest Lou
(B) To fingerprint Lou
(C) To require Lou to answer questions
(D) To require Lou to go to the police station
20 Which of the following has the jurisdiction to prosecute genocide?
(A) The Human Rights Council
(B) The International Criminal Court
(C) The International Court of Justice
(D) The United Nations Security Council
Section II
Part A – Human Rights
15 marks
Attempt Questions 21–24
Answer the questions in the spaces provided. These spaces provide guidance for the expected
length of the response.
Question 21 (2 marks)
Identify TWO non-government organisations that promote human rights. 2
Question 22 (2 marks)
Define the right to self-determination. 2
Question 23 (5 marks)
Outline how ONE human right has been legally recognised. 5
Question 24 (6 marks)
With reference to ONE contemporary human rights issue, explain the role of state 6
sovereignty in enforcing human rights.
Part B – Crime
