Section I
20 marks
Attempt Questions 1–20
Allow about 30 minutes for this section
Use the multiple-choice answer sheet for Questions 1–20.
1 Who has the burden of proof in a criminal case?
(A) The jury
(B) The judge
(C) The defence
(D) The prosecution
2 What is the purpose of a committal hearing?
(A) To charge the accused
(B) To establish the state's case
(C) To enter into charge negotiation
(D) To empanel a jury from the electoral roll
3 Which of the following rights is an example of universal suffrage?
(A) The right to vote
(B) The right to marry
(C) The right to education
(D) The right to freedom of religion
4 In the criminal justice system, decisions of higher courts are binding on lower courts.
Which of the following terms is this statement describing?
(A) Adjournment
(B) Adjudication
(C) Jurisdiction
(D) Precedent
5 In a criminal trial, the role of a jury is to determine whether
(A) a sentence is given.
(B) the standard of proof is met.
(C) legal representation is granted.
(D) evidence is admissible in court.
6 A known offender is not released after his sentence has been served.
What type of detention is this?
(A) Home
(B) Periodic
(C) Weekend
(D) Continued
7 In the District Court, 25-year-old Morgan is convicted of drug trafficking.
What is the highest court that could hear an appeal by Morgan against the conviction?
(A) Drug Court
(B) High Court of Australia
(C) Supreme Court of NSW
(D) Court of Criminal Appeal of NSW
8 The separation of powers in the Australian Constitution establishes the independence
between
(A) barristers, judges and juries.
(B) local, district and supreme courts.
(C) judiciary, legislature and executive.
(D) local, state and federal governments.
Use the following information to answer Questions 9–11.
25-year-old Jordan and 23-year-old Darcy stole cigarettes from a shop. As they were leaving the shop, Jordan and Darcy forced 18-year-old Ariel to hide the cigarettes under her shirt. They were then apprehended by police, taken to the local police station and charged.
9 To what legal right are Jordan, Darcy and Ariel entitled while being questioned at the
police station?
(A) The right to remain silent
(B) The right to apply for bail
(C) The right to make a phone call
(D) The right to be questioned together
10 Which court has original jurisdiction to hear these charges?
(A) Drug Court
(B) Local Court
(C) District Court
(D) Supreme Court
11 Which of the following would be the most appropriate defence for Ariel to claim?
(A) Automatism
(B) Consent
(C) Duress
(D) Provocation
12 Which of the following is an example of an intergovernmental organisation?
(A) Amnesty International
(B) Human Rights Watch
(C) Human Rights Council
(D) International Committee of the Red Cross
13 What is the main aim of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights?
(A) To protect the educational needs of people
(B) To protect the cultural wellbeing of people
(C) To protect people in regards to their basic needs
(D) To protect people from arbitrary use of power by governments
14 What comes under the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court?
(A) War crimes
(B) Cyber-terrorism
(C) Drug trafficking
(D) People smuggling
15 An accused is considered innocent until proven guilty.
Which of the following best reflects this principle?
(A) Bail
(B) Remand
(C) Suspended sentence
(D) No conviction recorded
Use the following information to answer Questions 16–18
Kim and Ashley, both 14 years of age, buy spray paint cans from the local hardware store. While on the train home they take the spray paint cans out of their bags. They are spotted by two police officers who approach and question them. They take the spray paint cans from them. Kim and Ashley go voluntarily with the officers to the police station.
16 Which of the following actions by the police would NOT be permitted by law?
(A) Approaching Kim and Ashley on the train
(B) Seizing the spray paint cans from Kim and Ashley
(C) Insisting Kim and Ashley go to the police station
(D) Asking Kim and Ashley a series of questions on the train
17 What is the first duty of the police once Kim and Ashley arrive at the police station?
(A) To take a record of interview
(B) To photograph and fingerprint them
(C) To contact their parents or guardians
(D) To formally charge them with an offence
18 Why could Kim and Ashley be charged with a strict liability offence?
(A) They had purchased the spray paint cans
(B) They had the intention to use the spray paint cans
(C) They had no proof of purchase for the spray paint cans
(D) They had possession of the spray paint cans on the train
19 Where a human right is set out in an international instrument, the action that best ensures
its protection in Australian law is for it to be
(A) acknowledged.
(B) enacted.
(C) promoted.
(D) ratified.
20 Alice has received an official legal document in relation to an offence she has allegedly
committed. She is required to attend the local court on a certain date.
What is this legal document known as?
(A) An indictment
(B) An injunction
(C) A summons
(D) A warrant
Section II
Part A – Human Rights
15 marks
Attempt Questions 21–23
Answer the questions in the spaces provided. These spaces provide guidance for the expected
length of the response.
Question 21 (3 marks)
What impact does state sovereignty have on the protection of human rights? 3
Question 22 (5 marks)
How has the promotion of ONE contemporary human rights issue been influenced by 5
the media?
Question 23 (7 marks)
Discuss how a charter of rights could affect the protection of human rights within 7
Australia.
Part B – Crime
