Section I
20 marks
Attempt Questions 1–20
Allow about 30 minutes for this section
Use the multiple-choice answer sheet for Questions 1–20.
1 What is the standard of proof in a criminal case?
(A) Beyond any doubt
(B) Beyond reasonable doubt
(C) On the balance of possibilities
(D) On the balance of probabilities
2 In which court does a magistrate have jurisdiction to hear cases?
(A) High Court
(B) Local Court
(C) District Court
(D) Supreme Court
3 Who has the burden of proof in a criminal case?
(A) Jury
(B) Plaintiff
(C) Defendant
(D) Prosecution
4 In the strict liability offence of selling alcohol to a 16-year-old, which of the following
must be proven?
(A) Mens rea
(B) Causation
(C) Actus reus
(D) Recklessness
5 Which of the following is a mitigating circumstance in a sentencing decision?
(A) The offender is young.
(B) The offender used a weapon.
(C) The offender has a prior conviction.
(D) The offender believed what he or she did was right.
6 Which of the following is an example of a collective right?
(A) Education
(B) Trade unionism
(C) Self-determination
(D) Freedom of association
7 Which of the following is the best example of a transnational crime?
(A) Torture
(B) Genocide
(C) War crimes
(D) Human trafficking
8 A pedestrian obstructs traffic. What type of offence is this?
(A) A driving offence
(B) An economic offence
(C) A preliminary offence
(D) A public order offence
9 A person is convicted of a drug offence in the District Court. The person wishes to have
this conviction reviewed.
Which court would the person go to?
(A) Drug Court
(B) High Court
(C) Federal Court
(D) Court of Criminal Appeal
10 Which of the following is an example of social crime prevention?
(A) Employing security guards at a music festival
(B) Providing employment skills for young people
(C) Refusing concert entry to an intoxicated person
(D) Installing closed circuit cameras around railway stations
11 Which of the following is true of circle sentencing?
(A) It promotes recidivism.
(B) It involves a magistrate.
(C) It does not have the power of a court.
(D) It allows the victim to determine the penalty.
12 Which of the following is the most likely reason for a court to require an offender to
forfeit assets?
(A) Caution
(B) Discretion
(C) Retribution
(D) Rehabilitation
13 Which of the following is a complete defence to a crime?
(A) Necessity
(B) Provocation
(C) Ignorance of the law
(D) Diminished responsibility
14 Which of the following human rights is directly recognised in the Australian
Constitution?
(A) Right to vote
(B) Right to privacy
(C) Freedom of speech
(D) Freedom of assembly
15 Melanie has been arrested and a magistrate has determined that the case will proceed to
trial. The magistrate has decided not to release her while waiting for the trial to be held.
Which of the following correctly describes Melanie's situation?
(A) She is on bail.
(B) She is in custody.
(C) She is on remand.
(D) She is in detention.
16 The Children's Court decides that a 15-year-old should be sent to a juvenile justice centre
for twelve months.
What is this an example of?
(A) Probation
(B) A control order
(C) A suspended sentence
(D) A diversionary program
17 The NSW Parliament changes an indictable offence to a summary offence. A defendant
is now charged with that summary offence.
What right is no longer guaranteed?
(A) The right to a lawyer
(B) The right to a hearing
(C) The right to apply for bail
(D) The right to be judged by peers
18 Which of the following would be a feature of a statutory Charter of Rights in Australia?
(A) It would be able to be adapted to changing values.
(B) It could be changed by the House of Representatives.
(C) It could be changed by citizens through a referendum.
(D) It would be incorporated into the Australian Constitution.
19 Both the Federal and NSW Parliaments enact anti-discrimination legislation.
Which of the following best describes this power?
(A) Concurrent
(B) Executive
(C) Exclusive
(D) Residual
20 How does the separation of powers relate to human rights legislation in Australia?
(A) The judiciary amends the legislation.
(B) The executive applies the legislation.
(C) The legislature interprets the legislation.
(D) The Governor-General reviews the legislation.
Section II
Part A – Human Rights
15 marks
Attempt Questions 21–24
Answer the questions in the spaces provided. These spaces provide guidance for the expected
length of the response.
Question 21 (2 marks)
Define peace rights. 2
Question 22 (2 marks)
How is the right to an education protected? 2
Question 23 (4 marks)
How does the United Nations assist in protecting human rights? 4
Question 24 (7 marks)
Explain how changing values have been reflected in the promotion and enforcement of 7
ONE human rights issue.
Part B – Crime
