Section I
20 marks
Attempt Questions 1–20
Allow about 30 minutes for this section
Use the multiple-choice answer sheet for Questions 1–20.
1 What is self-determination?
(A) The right to vote
(B) The right to a jury trial
(C) The right to legal representation
(D) The right of a group to make decisions for itself
2 Which court would hear the offence of speeding in a school zone when it first becomes
a court matter?
(A) Drug Court
(B) Local Court
(C) District Court
(D) Supreme Court
Use the following information to answer Questions 3 and 4.
Andrew illegally downloaded music from the internet.
3 What role did Andrew play in committing this offence?
(A) Accessory after the fact
(B) Accessory before the fact
(C) Principal in the first degree
(D) Principal in the second degree
4 Which category of crime does Andrew's behaviour fall under?
(A) Conspiracy
(B) Preliminary crime
(C) Economic offence
(D) Offence against the person
5 Which of the following can be a member of the United Nations?
(A) A head of state
(B) A sovereign state
(C) A state government
(D) A minister for foreign affairs
6 Who determines if the standard of proof has been met in a criminal case?
(A) The jury
(B) The police
(C) The defendant
(D) The prosecution
7 Which of the following is an example of an intergovernmental organisation?
(A) Federal Parliament
(B) Amnesty International
(C) Commonwealth of Nations
(D) Australian Human Rights Commission
8 The Supreme Court is hearing a criminal case. At the conclusion of the third day, two
jurors visit the crime scene. They discuss the defendant's evidence and then encourage
other jurors to find the defendant guilty.
What is this an example of?
(A) A role of the jury
(B) A denial of justice
(C) An aggravating factor
(D) A peremptory challenge
9 A magistrate orders an offender to serve six months in gaol, to be served only if the
offender is not of good behaviour during this time.
This is an example of
(A) probation.
(B) imprisonment.
(C) a suspended sentence.
(D) a diversionary program.
10 Peter, while under the influence of drugs, has caused the death of another person. He is
charged with murder.
Which court will be the first to hear the charge against Peter?
(A) Drug Court
(B) Local Court
(C) Supreme Court
(D) Coroner's Court
11 How are international human rights protected under Australian law?
(A) Treaties are enacted by a federal statute.
(B) Covenants are ratified by the Governor-General.
(C) Declarations are incorporated into the Australian Constitution.
(D) Conventions are enforced by the Australian Human Rights Commission.
12 How is the right to legal representation best described?
(A) It is a right limited under common law.
(B) It is a right protected under the Australian Constitution.
(C) It is a right to free legal aid provided in most criminal cases.
(D) It is a right protected under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
13 The purpose of specific deterrence in sentencing is to
(A) direct the offender to undertake education and training.
(B) direct the offender to complete a community service order.
(C) discourage the offender from committing the offence again.
(D) discourage others who may consider committing a similar offence.
14 The police hold Susan in custody because they believe she may commit a serious crime.
What is this an example of?
(A) Remand
(B) Recidivism
(C) Protective custody
(D) Preventative detention
15 Which of the following is a feature of statutory protection of human rights in Australia?
(A) Parliament cannot change human rights legislation.
(B) Judges interpret and apply human rights legislation.
(C) A referendum is required to amend human rights legislation.
(D) Human rights treaties are enshrined in the Australian Constitution.
16 Which of the following is true of the International Criminal Court?
(A) It is an ad hoc tribunal.
(B) It is established by a treaty.
(C) It deals with transnational crimes.
(D) It is the judicial arm of the United Nations.
17 Which of the following is true of a victim impact statement?
(A) It allows a victim to recommend a punishment.
(B) It provides evidence for the prosecution in the trial.
(C) It must be given by a person against whom the offence was committed.
(D) It must be received by the court in writing after the conviction of the defendant.
18 Kim is 12 years old. She has been accused of shoplifting from a major retail store. The
matter has proceeded to court.
Which of the following applies to Kim?
(A) She will have a criminal record.
(B) Her case will be heard in the Local Court.
(C) She is presumed to be incapable of committing the offence.
(D) She is below the age of criminal responsibility and will be acquitted.
Use the following information to answer Questions 19 and 20.
Judy was charged with murder. Her defence of substantial impairment by abnormality of the mind was accepted. Judy was then convicted of manslaughter in a judge-only trial. She had prior serious criminal convictions and was sentenced to three years imprisonment.
19 For Judy's defence, it was necessary for her to show evidence of
(A) provocation.
(B) remorse for her actions.
(C) her innocence beyond reasonable doubt.
(D) her limited ability to understand events.
20 In this case an appeal is most likely to be made by
(A) Judy, against her conviction for manslaughter.
(B) Judy, as the sentencing judge did not consider aggravating factors.
(C) the Director of Public Prosecutions, as the sentence was inadequate.
(D) the Director of Public Prosecutions, as the case was not heard by a jury.
Section II
Part A – Human Rights
15 marks
Attempt Questions 21–23
Answer the questions in the spaces provided. These spaces provide guidance for the expected
length of the response.
Question 21 (3 marks)
Outline how ONE international human rights document contributes to the 3
development of human rights.
Question 22 (5 marks)
How are human rights protected by the Australian Constitution? 5
Question 23 (7 marks)
Compare the roles of international and domestic courts in protecting human rights. 7
Part B – Crime
